# OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL)

Shaders always begin with a _version_ declaration, followed by a list of _input and output variables_, _uniforms_ and its `main` function.  
Each shader's entry point is at its `main` function where it processes any input variables and outputs the results in its output variables.

```glsl
#version version_number

layout (location = <int_value>) in <type> <in_variable_name>;
in <type> <in_variable_name>;

out <type> <out_variable_name>;

uniform <type> <uniform_name>;

void main()
{
    // process input(s) and do some weird graphics stuff
    ...
    // output processed stuff to output variable
    <out_variable_name> = <expression>;
}
```

In the **vertex shader** each input variable is also known as a _vertex attribute_. There is a maximum number of vertex attributes allowed to be declared, limited by the hardware. OpenGL guarantees there are always at least 16 4-component vertex attributes available.

## [Rendering Pipeline](https://www.khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Rendering_Pipeline_Overview)

Rendering Pipeline Stages:

1. Vertex Specification
2. Vertex Shader (Programmable)
3. Tessellation (Programmable)
4. Geometry Shader (Programmable)
5. Vertex Post-Processing
6. Primitive Assembly
7. Rasterization
8. Fragment Shader (Programmable)
9. Pre-Sample Operations

The [Vertex Shader][vertex_shader_wiki] is the programmable Shader stage in the rendering pipeline that handles the processing of individual vertices.  
A [Fragment Shader][fragment_shader_wiki] is the Shader stage that will process a [Fragment][fragment_wiki] generated by the [Rasterization][rasterization_wiki] into a set of colors and a single depth value.

[vertex_shader_wiki]: https://www.khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Vertex_Shader
[fragment_shader_wiki]: https://www.khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Fragment_Shader
[fragment_wiki]: https://www.khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Fragment
[rasterization_wiki]: https://www.khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Rasterization

## Types

GLSL has, like any other programming language, data types for specifying various kinds of variables to work with.  
GLSL has most of the default basic types from languages like C: `int`, `float`, `double`, `uint` and `bool`.  
GLSL also features two container types, namely vectors and matrices.

### Vectors

A vector in GLSL is a 1, 2, 3 or 4 component container for any of the basic types.

They can take the following form (`n` represents the number of components):

- `vecn`: the default vector of `n` floats.
- `bvecn`: a vector of `n` booleans.
- `ivecn`: a vector of `n` integers.
- `uvecn`: a vector of `n` unsigned integers.
- `dvecn`: a vector of `n` double components.

Components of a vector can be accessed via `vec.x` where `x` is the first component of the vector.  
it's possible to use `.x`, `.y`, `.z` and `.w` to access their first, second, third and fourth component respectively.  
GLSL also allows to use `rgba` for colors or `stpq` for texture coordinates, accessing the same components.

The vector datatype allows for some interesting and flexible component selection called swizzling. Swizzling allows to use syntax like this:

```glsl
vec2 someVec;
vec4 differentVec = someVec.xyxx;
vec3 anotherVec = differentVec.zyw;
vec4 otherVec = someVec.xxxx + anotherVec.yxzy;

vec2 vect = vec2(0.5, 0.7);
vec4 result = vec4(vect, 0.0, 0.0);
vec4 otherResult = vec4(result.xyz, 1.0);
```

## In & Out Variables

Each shader can specify inputs and outputs using the `in` and `out` keywords and wherever an output variable matches with an input variable of the next shader stage they're passed along.  
The vertex and fragment shader differ a bit though.

The vertex shader **should** receive some form of input otherwise it would be pretty ineffective. The vertex shader differs in its input, in that it receives its input straight from the vertex data. To define how the vertex data is organized specify the input variables with `location` metadata so it's possible to configure the vertex attributes on the CPU.  
The vertex shader thus requires an extra layout specification for its inputs so we can link it with the vertex data.

The other exception is that the fragment shader requires a `vec4` color output variable, since the fragment shaders needs to generate a final output color.  
If an output color s not specified in the fragment shader, the color buffer output for those fragments will be undefined (which usually means OpenGL will render them either black or white).

## Uniforms

**Uniforms** are another way to pass data from the application on the CPU to the shaders on the GPU. Uniforms are however slightly different compared to vertex attributes.  
First of all, uniforms are global. Global, meaning that a uniform variable is unique per shader program object, and can be accessed from any shader at any stage in the shader program.  
Second, whatever you set the uniform value to, uniforms will keep their values until they're either reset or updated.

```glsl
#version 330 core
out vec4 FragColor;

uniform vec4 color; // set this variable in the OpenGL code

void main()
{
    FragColor = color;
}
```

**Note**: finding the uniform location does not require to use the shader program first, but updating a uniform does because it sets the uniform on the currently active shader program.
